From: wwg@coutts.UUCP (Warren Gay)
Newsgroups: comp.os.cpm
Subject: SuperBrain Lobotomies: #2 The EPROM Socket
Date: 26 Oct 94 03:47:12 GMT

In  the  first  of  this series (#0), I covered the hardware
aspects of the Intertec Data Systems SuperBrain.  In article
#1 we discovered how to read the EPROM socket and copy it to
a CP/M file.

Before  scrambling  the  brain  of  our  patient, we need to
address the patients EPROM socket itself. Its very important
to  SuperBrain  owners to  know about.  For the general CP/M
audience,  you may prefer to skip to the end of this article
instead.

2716 (2K) EPROM Socket:
-----------------------

Not  all  2716's  are made alike.  I found out the hard way,
even though I did know this fact a long time ago.  My memory
has suffered some parity errors I guess.

SuperBrains have come out with both the Intel 2716 EPROM and
the   Texas   Instruments   pursuasion.    THESE   ARE   NOT
INTERCHANGABLE! Please read on.

Which Have I Got?
-----------------

Turn   on  you  SuperBrain  with  the  cover  off.   With  a
multimeter,  put the  Black  (-)  lead  on pin  #12, and the
positive  (+) meter  lead  on  pin  24.  You should read the
normal +5 Volts. Good.

Take  the  +ve  lead off of pin #24 and move it to EPROM pin
#21  while keeping  your  black  lead  on pin 12, for all of
these tests.

NOTE!  BE  VERY CAREFUL *NOT* TO SHORT TWO NEIGHBOURING PINS
WITH  THE  METER  PROBES!!!! Neighbouring pins don't like -5
Volts nor +12 Volts!

If pin #21 reads -5 Volts (ie. negative 5 volts), then it is
of the Texas  Instruments  pursuasion.  This can  be further
verified by testing pin #19 and it should read +12V if its a
TI  chip. For Intel 2716's, the voltages on #21 and #19 will
be somewhere between 0 and +5 volts.


The First Lobotomy:
-------------------

Well,  I  learned the hard way that my Superbrain was of the
Texas Instrument sway.  This really bugged me, since my half
baked EPROM burner can't really cope with these without some
modifications that I was unwilling to make. Furthermore, who
needs these triple supply chips anyhow? I didn't have any on
hand that I could trust.

Fortunately,  I had the foresight to save the EPROM contents
to disk first. But I really didn't think I was going to need
it. Live and learn.

Since  I  had the EPROM data on diskette, all I needed was a
new EPROM burned for it -- an Intel 2716 flavour! To do this
would require one of two approaches-- I tried them both.


(1) The HACKED Intel EPROM:
---------------------------

When I first lost my EPROM I was almost in dispair. However,
I  got  "even" by  cooking up a real ugly hack, that I don't
recommend to anyone. I first burnt in the EPROM. I then bent
back  pins 19,20  and 21 so they stuck out the side, and did
not go into the socket.

I  soldered (carefully!!!)  a jumper on the top of the EPROM
from  pin  12 (Gnd)  to pin 20 (/output_enable).  I soldered
another  jumper from pin 21 (Vpp)  to pin 24 (Vcc=+5V).  The
final touch was to put a wire from pin 19 (A10) and plug the
wire into free socket pin 20 (the Texas Instruments A10).  A
real ugly and  unsafe  hack,  but it proved that the rest of
the  CPU was still alive and functional.  (note I was lucky:
normally I'd expect  to lose several EPROMS trying to solder
those wires on etc. due to electrostatic discharges).


Intel vs Texas Instruments:
---------------------------

To  make  the  above  distinctions  clearer,  its time for a
picture:

        Intel:          T.I.
        2716            2716
        __              __
        24|-            24|-
          |-              |-
          |-              |-
        21|- Vpp        21|- -5V        All other pins identical.
        20|- /OE        20|- A10
        19|- A10        19|- +12V
          |-              |-

Note  the TI chip does not have an /OE function.  When going
to  an Intel  2716  chip in the same hardware, means that we
can  tie   /OE  to  ground  and  leave  the  output  enabled
permanently.


(2) EPROM Socket Lobotomy:
--------------------------

Since  I knew that EPROM changes were forthcoming, the above
hack  was not  a  permanent solution.  It would  be  a EPROM
programming nightmare to hack this way each time.

Before  planning your wiring changes, I'd recommend that you
remove the original EPROM socket first. If you can spare the
$$$,  put  a low profile ZIF socket in, or even one of those
economy  ZIF  sockets.  I  didn't put a ZIF in, but I wish I
did. The only thing to watch out for is that you have enough
clearance with the cabinet cover.  There isn't a lot of room
to spare. Keep to low profile sockets.

However, remove the socket. I snipped the top and the bottom
horizontal  runners  with  wire  cutters. I was then able to
carefully pull each half up and off the PC board. Then using
a  soldering  iron,  remove the  socket recepticals one at a
time. No special tools required.

Once the socket is fully removed, then go over each pad with
a soldering iron and a solder sucker. I used the desoldering
tool  available  at  RS that  allows  you  to load and use a
trigger. Your mileage may vary.

Having removed the socket, you are ready to cut traces.

The wiring changes required are quite simple. Disconnect the
-5V and  the  +12V  totally  from  the  socket-- they're not
needed for an Intel 2716.  Since A10 is on the wrong pin for
Intel  2716's, it  too  has  to  be  scratched away from the
socket.

Make sure there are no solder shorts remaining.  Make doubly
sure that you  scratched  away  the  -5V and +12V traces. Be
real careful to scratch the correct traces!  Its easy to get
wrong upside down and backwards. Don't get lazy there!

The  -5V  and  +12V traces were on the bottom side of the PC
board  and were thick.  The  A10  trace was on top of the PC
board and went underneath the original socket plastic.

[Short  cut:  If  you don't like the trouble of removing the
socket you  can  probably take this short cut. I removed the
socket because  I could  not  be sure of all the traces with
the plastic obscuring my view.  However, on my PC board, the
-5V and +12V can be scratched from the bottom easily without
socket  removal.  They don't go anywhere else from under the
socket. Then  on  the  top  side,  scratch what might be A10
traces, and  use a multimeter to find the trace for sure (it
goes  to pin #20 in the socket).  Having located A10, it too
can be scratched without socket removal. However...  your PC
board might be different! Lazyman beware!]

Having   cut   the  3  traces  correctly,  install  the  new
replacement  socket. Use  wire  wrap  wire for the following
mods:

The  next  thing  is  to wire socket pin 21 (Vpp)  to pin 24
(+5V). Socket pin 20 (/OE) has to be grounded, so I wired it
to  pin 12  (Gnd).  The final alteration  has to wire pin 19
(A10)  to the A10 strip on the motherboard. I found that the
most  convenient place to pick this up from was from pin #40
(A10) on  the  [leftmost]  Z80A  CPU, which is very near the
socket.  If  you scratch  the original A10 trace, and use an
ohmmeter,  you should find continuity with pin 40 of the CPU
chip, if you want to double check this.

Having  done  this  lobotomy,  the  only  left is to put the
normal Intel 2716  EPROM  into  the  socket and hope for the
best.  If you put a ZIF socket in, you can perform all kinds
of midnight lobotomies!

The next articles will deal with EPROM code patches.

--------------------
Warren W. Gay VE3WWG            John Coutts Library Services Limited            
wwg@coutts.UUCP                 Niagara Falls, Ontario, Canada
